Poet and Saint! to thee alone are giv'n
The two most sacred names of Earth and Heav'n,
The hardest, rarest union which can be
Next that of godhead with humanity.
Long did the Muses banish'd slaves abide,
And built vain pyramids to mortal pride;
Like Moses thou (tho' spells and charms withstand)
Hast brought them nobly home, back to their Holy Land.
Ah, wretched we, Poets of Earth! but thou
Wert living, the same Poet which thou'rt now;
Whilst angels sing to thee their ayres divine,
And joy in an applause so great as thine.
Equal society with them to hold,
Thou need'st not make new songs, but say the old;
And they (kind spirits!) shall all rejoice to see,
How little less than they, exalted man may be.
Still the old heathen gods in numbers dwell,
The heav'nliest thing on Earth still keeps up Hell:
Nor have we yet quite purg'd the Christian land;
Still idols here, like calves at Bethel stand.
And tho' Pan's death long since all or'cles broke,
Yet still in rhyme the fiend Apollo spoke;
Nay, with the worst of heathen dotage, we
(Vain men!) the monster woman deifie;
Find stars, and tie our fates there in a face,
And Paradise in them, by whom we lost it, place.
What diff'rent faults corrupt our Muses thus?
Wanton as girls, as old wives, fabulous.
Thy spotless Muse, like Mary, did contain
The boundless Godhead; she did well disdain
That her eternal verse employ'd should be
On a less subject than eternity;
And for a sacred mistress scorn'd to take
But her whom God Himself scorn'd not His spouse to make:
It (in a kind) her miracle did do,
A fruitful mother was, and virgin too.
How well (blest Swan) did Fate contrive thy death,
And made thee render up thy tuneful breath
In thy great mistress's arms! Thou most divine,
And richest off'ring of Loretto's shrine!
Where, like some holy sacrifice t' expire,
A fever burns thee, and Love lights the fire.
Angels (they say) brought the fam'd chappel there,
And bore the sacred load in triumph thro' the air:
'Tis surer much they brought thee there; and they,
And thou, their charge, went singing all the way.
Pardon, my Mother-Church, if I consent
That angels led him, when from thee he went;
For ev'n in error, sure no danger is,
When join'd with so much piety as his.
Ah! mighty God, with shame I speak't, and grief;
Ah! that our greatest faults were in belief!
And our weak reason were ev'n weaker yet,
Rather than thus, our wills too strong for it.
His faith, perhaps, in some nice tenets might
Be wrong; his life, I'm sure, was in the right:
And I, myself, a Catholick will be;
So far at least, great Saint! to pray to thee.
Hail, Bard triumphant! and some care bestow
On us, the Poets militant below:
Oppos'd by our old enemy, adverse Chance,
Attack'd by Envy and by Ignorance;
Enchain'd by Beauty, tortur'd by desires,
Expos'd by tyrant-love, to savage beasts and fires.
Thou from low Earth in nobler flames didst rise,
And like Elijah, mount alive the skies.
Elisha-like (but with a wish much less,
More fit thy greatness and my littleness;)
Lo here I beg (I whom thou once didst prove
So humble to esteem, so good to love)
Not that thy sp'rit might on me doubled be,
I ask but half thy mighty sp'rit for me:
And when my Muse soars with so strong a wing,
First was the World as one great Cymbal made,
Where Jarring Windes to infant Nature plaid.
All Musick was a solitary sound,
To hollow Rocks and murm'ring Fountains bound.
Jubal first made the wilder Notes agree;
And Jubal tun'd Musicks Jubilee:
He call'd the Ecchoes from their sullen Cell,
And built the Organs City where they dwell.
Each sought a consort in that lovely place;
And Virgin Trebles wed the manly Base.
From whence the Progeny of numbers new
Into harmonious Colonies withdrew.
Some to the Lute, some to the Viol went,
And others chose the Cornet eloquent.
These practising the Wind, and those the Wire,
To sing Mens Triumphs, or in Heavens quire.
Then Musick, the Mosaique of the Air,
Did of all these a solemn noise prepare:
With which She gain'd the Empire of the Ear,
Including all between the Earth and Sphear.
Victorious sounds yet here your Homage do
Unto a gentler Conqueror then you;
Who though He flies the Musick of his praise,
Would with you Heavens Hallelujahs raise.
The two chief Gifts Heav'n could on Man bestow.
Much danger first, much toil did he sustain,
Whilst Saul and Hell crost his strong fate in vain.
Nor did his Crown less painful work afford;
Less exercise his Patience, or his Sword;
So long her Conque'ror Fortunes spight pursu'ed;
Till with unwearied Virtue he subdue'd
All homebred Malice, and all foreign boasts;
Their strength was Armies, his the Lord of Hosts.
Thou, who didst Davids royal stem adorn,
And gav'st him birth from whom thy self was't born.
Who didst in Triumph at Deaths Court appear,
And slew'st him with thy Nails, thy Cross and Spear,
Whilst Hells black Tyrant trembled to behold,
The glorious light he forfeited of old,
Who Heav'ens glad burden now, and justest pride,
Sitst high enthron'ed next thy great Fathers side,
(Where hallowed Flames help to adorn that Head
Which once the blushing Thorns invironed,
Till crimson drops of pretious blood hung down
Like Rubies to enrich thine humble Crown.)
Ev'en Thou my breast with such blest rage inspire,
As mov'ed the tuneful strings of Davids Lyre,
Guid my bold steps with thine old trav'elling Flame,*
In these untrodden paths to Sacred Fame;
Lo, with pure hands thy heav'enly Fires to take,
My well-chang'ed Muse I a chaste Vestal make!
From earths vain joys, and loves soft witchcraft free,
I consecrate my Magdalene to Thee!
Lo, this great work, a Temple to thy praise,
On polisht Pillars of strong Verse I raise!
A Temple, where if Thou vouchfafe to dwell,
His mutinous waters hurry to the war,
And Troops of Waves come rolling from afar.
Then scorns he such weak stops to his free source,
And overruns the neighboring fields with violent course.
This knew the Tyrant, and this useful thought
His wounded mind to health and temper brought.
He old kind vows to David did renew,
Swore constancy, and meant his oath for true.
A general joy at this glad news appear'd,
For David all men lov'ed, and Saul they fear'd.
Angels and Men did Peace, and David love,
But Hell did neither Him, nor That approve;
From Mans agreement fierce Alarms they take;
And Quiet here, does there new Business make.
Beneath the silent chambers of the earth,
Where the Suns fruitful beams give metals birth,
Where he the growth of fatal Gold does see,
Gold which above more Influence has then Hee.
Endless as those dire pains that in it dwell.
Here no dear glimpse of the Suns lovely face,
Strikes through the Solid darkness of the place;
No dawning Morn does her kind reds display;
One slight weak beam would here be thought the Day.
No gentle stars with their fair Gems of Light
Offend the tyr'annous and unquestion'd Night.
Here Lucifer, the mighty Captive, reigns,
Proud, midst his Woes, and Tyrant in his Chains.
Once General of a guilded Host of Sprights,
Like Hesper, leading forth the spangled Nights.
But down like Lightning, which him strook, he came;
And roard at his first plunge into the Flame.
Myriads of Spirits fell wounded round him there;
With dropping Lights thick shone the singed Aire.
Since when the dismal Solace of their wo,
Has onely been weak Mankind to undo;
Themselves at first against themselves they'excite,
(Their dearest Conquest, and most proud delight)
And if those Mines of secret Treason fail,
With open force mans Vertue they assail;
Unable to corrupt, seek to destroy;
And where their Poysons miss, the Sword employ.
Thus sought the Tyrant Fiend young Davids fall;
And 'gainst him arm'd the powerful rage of Saul.
He saw the beauties of his shape and face,
The sacred Scepter in blest Iudahs race,
From which th'aeternal Shilo was to spring;
A Knowledge which new Hells to Hell did bring!
And though no less he knew himself too weak
The smallest Link of strong-wrought Fate to break;
Yet would he rage, and struggle with the Chain;
Lov'ed to Rebel though sure that 'twas in vain.
And now it broke his form'd design, to find
The gentle change of Sauls recov'ering Mind.
He trusted much in Saul, and rag'ed and griev'd
(The great Deceiver) to be Himself Deceiv'd.
Thrice did he knock his iron teeth, thrice howl,
And into frowns his wrathful forehead rowl.
His eyes dart forth red flames which scare the night,
And with worse fires the trembling Ghosts affright.