Thou, att whose feete I waste mie soule in sighes,
Before whose beautie mie proude hearte is meeke,
Thou who make'st dove-like mie fierce falcon-cies,
And pale'st the rose of mie Lancastrian cheeke
With one colde smyle about this budded mouth:
Oh! that mie harmlesse vengeaunce I could wreake,
On that pale rival bloome of thine!—the South
Raves not more fell, prisoned an Aprill weeke,
To feede on lilie-banks, than I to prey
Some greedie minutes on that blossome whyte,
Whose gentle ravage thou'dst too long delaie!—
O when these Roses of our cheekes unite,
Will't not a summer-happie season be
If not for Englande, in sweete soothe for me!
Hast thou upon the idle branches hung,
Nor, as the sweet wind thro' the rose-leaves sung,
Come down! and by my rival touch be rung,
Did not Alcæus with blood-streaming hand
Stealing forth sounds more eloquently bland
As if with myrtle-bough sweet Venus fanned
And shall not I, that never will imbrue
My battle-field, a bed of violets blue,
Shall not I wake the soul of sweetness too,
Fair as the flower is, it will yet decay;
Green as the leaf is, it will yet be sere;
Night has a pall to wind the gaudiest day,
And Winter wraps in shrouds the loveliest year:
For those the gale mourns in loud accents drear,
The blooms that gave it sweeter breath are gone;
Heaven's glistening eyes with many a silent tear
Beweep the nightly burial of the sun;
Nature herself the lifeless year deplores,
Sad Mother, laying all her children low,
From her deep heartspring grief's wild torrent pours,
Hill, vale, and desolate woodland speak her woe:
Thou too must fade like year—day—leaf—and bloom,
To thee, bright Lady! whom all hearts confess
Their queen, as thou dost highly pace along,
Like the Night's pale and lovely sultaness
Walking the wonder-silent stars among!
Beyond my lowly hopes—take thou no wrong
If in a perilous vein of liberty,
Nymph of the splendid brow and raven tress,
This humble strain I dedicate to thee.
Cold in thy loveliness, as that fond stone
Which vainly emulates thy purity,
Standing in Beauty's temple all alone,—
Do not despise the God of Song in me;
Do not, because thou art, we justly own,
Above all praise, above all homage be!
The snows are fled upon their watery wings,
And now no more the bounty of the springs
Now might the unclad Graces dance their rings,
Yet take the thought from the swift-changing year
Two months—and Spring was wreathing violets here,
Then will brown Autumn change her golden cheer
But rapid suns repair the year's decay,
We, when to earth our crumbling bones we lay,
Life has but one short lease of mortal clay,
Live not so thoughtless as the miser bee,
When Death shall lead thee to Destruction's sea
Of all thy worldly goods, but one to thee
Like the bird-minstrel, votress of the Moon,
Who will not pour her misanthropic lay
Until the night grows upward to its noon,
And the winds hymn the death-song of the day,
But silent all—in woodlands far away,
A little hermit sits within her cell
Mossy and dim, where no intruding ray
Peeps thro' the solitude she loves so well:
Like her, the sweet Enchantress of the dell,
Thou wilt not sing until the stars arise;
And then, like her, for ever wilt thou dwell
On tender themes that drench sweet Pity's eyes.
Sure that old Samian fable sooth must be,
And some dead nightingale revives in thee!
I stand upon the sod must lie on me,
Ere yon red rose in odour shall expire;
I think upon the time that soon shall be
When my soul mingles with immortal fire.
I muse on my new kindred of the tomb,
Brothers and sisters I mnst shortly know;
Few, few the hours, and fleet, ere I become
One of the pale society below!
Another Sabbath, and this sacred tower
Shall, in deep words, have tolled—his course is done!
Another Moon shall look into my bower,
And weeping lucid tears, say—he is gone!
Gone, where the proud are lowly as the meek,
Where simple ones are subtle as the sage,
Gone, where the strong are feeble as the weak,
Where rank no right, power has no privilege.
Where wealth is stripped as bare as wretchedness,
And Tyranny is fettered like his slave,
Where Beauty weeps her strange unloveliness,
Where Eloquence is dumb, and Folly grave.
Six foot of common, caitiff-making earth,
Often much less, and very seldom more,
Encompasses within its narrow girth,
Him whom a world could scarce contain before!
Ev'n on a spot as small—perchance as green,—
As this where I shall rest in unrenown,
The Conqueror of half the poles between,
Must lay himself and all his glory down.
Lone in the far Atlantic Isle he sleeps,
The modern Charlemagne, but mightier still;
A wretched willow o'er his tombstone weeps,
And round it mourns a miserable rill.
Upon his desolate couch the Homeless Star
Looks with a sympathetic sister eye;
As if she breathed these pitying words afar,
Outcast of Earth art thou, of Heaven, I!
The Wind-God haunting that sepulchral hill,
Pipes a wild coronach around the grave;
But none are there with martial voice to fill
His own loved trumpet o'er the buried brave.
There sleeps he, most forlorn,—almost forgot,—
In a drear Island, distant o'er the foam,
Here shall I sleep, laid in this quiet spot,
And find how sweet, in death itself, is Home!
Close by the foot of this gray Abbey wall,
Where leans the buttress that is leant upon,
(Like old companions fearing both to fall,
Each with its shoulder props the other one:)
Here would I wish my final bed of rest,
Tranquil and sheltry, ivy-overgrown,
With a green pall to spread upon my breast,
This is the spot I've fixed on as my own.
The dewy-throated nightingale sings here
Till midnight blends complexions with the morn;
And robin, in his crimson stomacher,
Sits challenging the woods on yonder thorn.
Circling around, the turret-swallow stoops
With sweet, weak whistle to salute her young;
Here, from their evening feast the crows in troops,
Come with hoarse music heavily along.
Now that her dusky robe the Night unfolds,
Thro' its light gauze wanders the aimless fly,
Homeward the bee her steady passage holds,
The stumbling beetle booms him headlong by.
Now from beneath the ivy-woven cowl,
Muffling the head of each tall pinnacle,
With solemn whirr comes forth the moody owl,
And flickering bat which loves the gloom as well.
How calm! how still!—nor is the glare of day,
Less sobered by the shadow of the pile,
It seems to frown the sun's rude light away,
And tempers ev'n the Moon's most pallid smile.
Sweet village church!—remote from village strife,
Yet still to home and heart's affection near,
If here so peaceful be the dream of life,
How peaceful must the sleep of death be here!
O let the proud, the wealthy, and the great,
Where huge cathedrals ope the venal choir,
Beneath their vain mausolea lie in state,
Give me a grave beneath the village spire!
I, like the shaded nightingale, would sing
In some far bower, amidst the woods, alone,
With nought but the wild streamlet's murmuring
To give my bosom-strings their plaintive tone;
Or the bleak winds that thro' the forest moan
To prompt with their rude minstrelsy my lay,
When to pale Dian on her silver throne
My unbesought addresses I can pay.
But expectation chills my vein of song;
Even the prayer of beauty or desert,
Breathed e'er so warm, so fervently, and long,
Freezes the well of passion at my heart!
What then?—I chant some worthless strain, until
Deep-ear'd attention quickly has her fill.
Buried for ever in my heart shall be
The image of that form I once adored,
Clasping it as a shrine on bended knee,
To gain one smile or sweet auspicious word:
In sooth it was more fond idolatry
Than woman should accept or man accord
To aught but One—and death avenged the Lord!
Yes; thou wert my Supreme Good—my All-wise,
Whose lightest syllable to me was law,
My acts out-went the wishes of thine eyes,
And inspiration from their glance did draw:
With a strange kind of satisfied surprise
At the swift potency of zeal, they saw
More done from love than millions do from awe.
The speech-beginning smile thy lips put on
Which ever made entreaty of command,
Ere into sweet slow words thy breath had gone—
Behold! thy dear desire was in thy hand!
A light intelligential round me shone,
Those eyes' blue effluence, whose flash, tho' bland,
Broke on my forehead like a lightning brand!
That moment I became all mind, heart, soul,
Danger and difficulty rose in vain;
Ev'n Destiny could scarce my deeds control,
Nor Prudence bind me in her brittle chain:
Methought I could have grasped each whirling pole,
And Earth's great axle bent or broke in twain!
For all, to Love, seem'd possible and plain.
Well that thy lowly, weak, and passionless breast,
Swelled with its own sweet feelings! and in those
Found all its joy; nor heaved with more unrest
Than the soft bosom of a maiden rose,
When Zephyr stoops to kiss the fringed vest;
So pure was thy chaste bosom, that the snows
Fall darker when the wintry ice-wind blows!
Full many a time didst thou thy votary pray,
Not—not to love so well! and many a time
Said'st thou wert but a slight, frail thing of clay,
And Heav'n would punish both for my one crime.
Ah! me it punished, hurrying thee away,
In thy sweet blooming-hood and beauteous prime,
Translated thro' the tomb to life's last clime.
I knew—I knew it would be so! for thou
Wert far too much of saint for this sad sphere;
How often did I search, with pain enow,
For some small touch of earth to keep thee here!
But no!—the fatal brightness of thy brow,
The lambent glory round thy temples dear,
Told thy election to the skies was near!
That halo, glimmering from each golden braid,
The vision of thy bright immortal crown,
Too plainly to my woe-struck heart betrayed
Heaven had already writ thee Angel down!
I saw thee early for the skies arrayed
In Purity's white veil and spotless gown,
Nor Hope would help me that sad image drown.
But for this creed,—I had not at thy shrine
Bowed my idolatrous heart and stubborn knee;
I thought thou wert so kindred to divine
'Twere no wrong piety to worship thee!
Beatitude and sanctity both thine,
What could'st thou less than a blest spirit be?—
So love of goodness bred great ill in me.
The blow that laid thee in the arms of Death,
That very night thou should'st have lain in these;
Time's thrilling watchword that chained up thy breath,
And with mere horror thy warm cheek did freeze
To bloodless alabaster; Conscience saith,
These are the visitations Heaven decrees
When man on earth his sole Elysium sees!
Ay me! 'tis true!—I did indeed forget
Flowers of true bliss on earth could never bloom:
But since my worshipt star of beauty set,
My joy is woe, my glory is in gloom.
Dark, noisome, dismal, with rank vapors wet,
This globe is like an universal tomb,
With doors down-leading to the caves of doom.
Fain would I choose me my small charnel-space,
Fain would I lie down blindly with the blind
Whose eyes are dust; fain would I take my place
In the vast catacomb of all mankind.
O that in Ruin's eyes I had found grace!
That my death-warrant tedious Fate had signed,
The charter of immortal life to mind!
Then would my spirit, on empyreal wings,
Soar up to Heaven, if sin would let it soar,
And bird-like, fluttering where its sweet mate sings,
Beat for admittance at the mercy door!
If great compassion touched the King of kings,
My mate and I His goodness might adore—
One voice, one soul, one essence, evermore!