But envious brains do nought, or light, esteem 

Such stately steps as they cannot attain : 
For whoso reaps renown above the rest, 
With heaps of hate shall surely be oppressed. 

Wherefore, to write my censure of this book, 
This Glass of Steel unpartially doth show 

Abuses all to such as in it look, 

From prince to poor, from high estate to low. 

As for the verse, who list like trade to try, 

I fear me much, shall hardly reach so high. 



What could they say to win again my grace ?— 
Forsooth, that they had seen my mistress' face. 

Another time, my heart I called to mind, — 
Thinking that he this woe on me had brought, 

Because that he to love his force resigned, 
When of such wars my fancy never thought : 

What could he say when I would him have slain? — 

That he was hers, and had forgone my chain. 

At last, when I perceived both eyes and heart 
Excuse themselves, as guiltless of my ill, 

I found myself the cause of all my smart. 
And told myself that I myself would kill : 

Yet when I saw myself to you was true, 

I loved myself, because myself loved you. 



Yet rich in zeal (though poor in learning's lore), 
And friendly care obscured in secret breast, 
And love that envy in thy life suppressed, — 

Thy dear life done, — and death hath doubled more. 

And I, that in thy time and Hving state 
Did only praise thy virtues in my thought, 
As one that seeld the rising sun hath sought, 

With words and tears now wail thy timeless fate. 

Drawn was thy race aright from princely line ; 
Nor less than such, by gifts that nature gave, — 
The common mother that all creatures have, — 

Doth virtue show, and princely lineage shine. 

A king gave thee thy name ; a kingly mind, — 
That God thee gave, — who found it now too dear 
For this base world, and hath resumed it near 

To sit in skies, and sort with powers divine. 

Kent thy birth-days, and Oxford held thy youth ; 
The heavens made haste, and stayed nor years 
nor time ; 

The fruits of age grew ripe in thy first prime ; 
Thy will, thy words ; thy words the seals of truth. 

Great gifts and wisdom rare employed thee thence. 
To treat from kings with those more great than 
kings ; 

Such hope men had to lay the highest things 
On thy wise youth, to be transported hence. , 

Whence to sharp wars sweet honour did thee call. 
Thy country's love, religion, and thy friends ; 
Of worthy men the marks, the lives, and ends, 

And her defence, for whom we labour all. 





There didst thou vanquish shame and tedious age, 
Grief, sorrow, sickness, and base fortune's might; 
Thy rising day saw never woeful night, 

But passed with praise from off this worldly stage. 

Back to the camp by thee that day was brought, 
First thine own death ; and after, thy long fame; 
Tears to the soldiers ; the proud Castilian's shame ; 

Virtue expressed, and honour truly taught. 

What hath he lost that such great grace hath won ? 
Young years for endless years, and hope unsure 
Of fortune's gifts for wealth that still shall dure : 

Q happy race, with so great praises run ! 

England doth hold thy limbs, that bred the same ; 

Flanders thy valour, where it last was tried ; 

The camp thy sorrow, where thy body died ; 
Thy friends thy want ; the world thy virtue's fame ; 

Nations thy wit ; our minds lay up thy love ; 

Letters thy learning ; thy loss years long to come ; 

In worthy hearts sorrow hath made thy tomb ; 
Thy soul and spright enrich the heavens above. 

Thy liberal heart embalmed in grateful tears. 
Young sighs, sweet sighs, sage sighs, bewail thy 
faU; 

Envy her sting, and spite hath left her gall ; 
Malice herself a mourning garment wears. 

That day their Hannibal died, our Scipio fell,— 
Scipio, Cicero, and Petrarch of our time ; 
Whose virtues, wounded by my worthless rhyme, 

Let angels speak, and heaven thy praises tell. 






Was wont to burn : and, passing by that way, 

To see that buried dust of living fame, 
Whose tomb fair Love and fairer Virtue kept. 

All suddenly I saw the Fairy Queen, 
At whose approach the soul of Petrarch wept ; 

And from thenceforth those graces were not seen. 
For they this Queen attended ; in whose stead 

Oblivion laid him down on Laura's hearse. 
Hereat the hardest stones were seen to bleed. 

And groans of buried ghosts the heavens did 
pierce : 

Where Homer's spright did tremble all for grief, 
And cursed the access of that celestial thief. 



A gown of grief my body shall attire, 

And broken hope shall be my strength and stay; 
And late repentance, linked with long desire, 

Shall be the couch whereon my limbs 111 lay. 
And at my gates despair shall linger still, 
To let in death when love and fortune will. 

My food shall be of care and sorrow made ; 

My drink nought else but tears fallen from mine 
eyes ; 

And for my light, in such obscured shade, 

The flames may serve which from my heart arise. 
And at my gates despair shall linger still, 
To let in death when love and fortune will. 


My lost delights, now clean from sight of land, 
Have left me all alone in unknown ways, 

My mind to woe, my life in fortune's hand ; 
Of all which past, the sorrow only stays. 

As in a country strange without companion, 

I only wail the wrong of death's delays. 
Whose sweet spring spent, whose summer well nigh 
done ; 

Of all which past, the sorrow only stays : 

Whom care forewarns, ere age and winter cold, 
To haste me hence to find my fortune's fold. 




Therefore take heed ; let fancy never swerve 

But unto him that will take leaves and all : 
For this be sure, the flower once plucked av^ay, 
Farewell the rest, thy happy days decay ! 

Many desire, but few or none deserve 
To cut the corn, not subject to the sickle ; 

Therefore take heed ; let fancy never swerve. 
But constant stand, for mowers' minds are fickle ; 

For this be sure, the crop being once obtained, 

Farewell the rest, the soil will be disdained. 




Four kings shall be assembled in this isle, 

Where they shall keep great tumult for awhile. 

Many men then shall have an end of crosses, 

And many likewise shall sustain great losses ; 

Many that now full joyful are and glad, 

Shall at that time be sorrowful and sad ; 

Full many a Christian's heart shall quake for fear. 

The dreadful sound of trump when he shall hear. 

Dead bones shall then be tumbled up and down, 

In every city and in every town. 

By day or night this tumult shall not cease. 

Until an herald shall proclaim a peace ; 

An herald strong, the like was never born, 

Whose very beard is flesh and mouth is horn. 



We should begin by such a parting light 

To write the story of all ages past, 
And end the same before the approaching night. 

Such is again the labour of my mind, 

Whose shroud, by sorrow woven now to end. 

Hath seen that ever shining sun declined. 
So many years that so could not descend. 

But that the eyes of my mind held her beams 

In every part transferred by love's swift thought ; 
Far off or near, in waking or in dreams. 

Imagination strong their lustre brought. 
Such force her angelic appearance had 

To master distance, time, or cruelty ; 
Such art to grieve, and after to make glad ; 

Such fear in love, such love in majesty. 
My weary lines her memory embalmed ; 

My darkest ways her eyes make clear as day. 
What storms so great but Cynthia's beams appeased ? 

What rage so fierce, that love could not allay ? 

Twelve years entire I wasted in this war ; 

Twelve years of my most happy younger days ; 
But I in them, and they now wasted are : 

" Of all which past, the sorrow only stays." 

So wrote I once, and my mishap foretold, 
My mind still feeling sorrowful success ; 

Even as before a storm the marble cold 

Doth by moist tears tempestuous times express. 

So felt my heavy mind my harms at hand. 

Which my vain thought in vain sought to recure : 

At middle day my sun seemed under land, 
When any little cloud did it obscure. 




And as the icicles in a winter's day, 

Whenas the sun shines with unwonted warm, 

So did my joys melt into secret tears ; 

So did my heart dissolve in wasting drops : 
And as the season of the year outwears. 

And heaps of snow from off the mountain tops 

• With sudden streams the valleys overflow, 

So did the time draw on my more despair : 
Then floods of sorrow and whole seas of woe 
The banks of all my hope did overbear, 

And drowned my mind in depths of misery : 
Sometime I died ; sometime I was distract, 

My soul the stage of fancy's tragedy ; 

Then furious madness, where true reason lacked, 

Wrote what it would, and scourged mine own 
conceit. 

Oh, heavy heart ! who can thee witness bear ? 
What tongue, what pen, could thy tormenting treat, 
But thine own mourning thoughts which present 
were ? 

What stranger mind believe the meanest part ? 

What altered sense conceive the weakest woe, 
That tare, that rent, that pierced thy sad heart ? 

And as a man distract, with triple might 

Bound in strong chains doth strive and rage in 
vain, 

Till, tired and breathless, he is forced to rest, — 

Finds by contention but increase of pain, 
And fiery heat inflamed in swollen breast ; 




So did my mind in change of passion 

From woe to wrath, from wrath return to woe, 
Struggling in vain from love's subjection ; 

Therefore, all lifeless and all helpless bound, 
My fainting spirits sunk, and heart appalled, 

My joys and hopes lay bleeding on the ground, 
That not long since the highest heaven scaled. 

I hated life and cursed destiny ; 

The thoughts of passed times, like flames of hell, 
Kindled afresh within my memory 

The many dear achievements that befell 

In those prime years and infancy of love, 

Which to describe were but to die in writing ; 

Ah, those I sought, but vainly, to remove. 
And vainly shall, by which I perish living. 

And though strong reason hold before mine eyes 
The images and forms of worlds past. 

Teaching the cause why all those flames that rise 
From forms external can no longer last, 

Than that those seeming beauties hold in prime 
Love's ground, his essence, and his empery, 

All slaves to age, and vassals unto time. 

Of which repentance writes the tragedy : — 

But this my heart's desire could not conceive. 
Whose love outflew the fastest flying time, 

A beauty that can easily deceive 

The arrest of years, and creeping age outclimb. 




A spring of beauties which time ripeth not — 
Time that but works on frail mortality ; 

A sweetness which woe's wrongs outwipeth not, 
Whom love hath chose for his divinity ; ^ 

A vestal fire that burns but never wasteth, 
That loseth nought by giving light to all, 

That endless shines each where, and endless lasteth. 
Blossoms of pride that can nor fade nor fall ; 

These were those marvellous perfections, 
The parents of my sorrow and my envy. 

Most deathful and most violent infections ; 
These be the tyrants that in fetters tie 

Their wounded vassals, yet nor kill nor cure. 
But glory in their lasting misery — 

That, as her beauties would, our woes should dure — 
These be the effects of powerful empery. 

Yet have these wounders want, which want com- 
passion ; 

Yet hath her mind some marks of human race ; 
Yet will she be a woman for a fashion. 
So doth she please her virtues to deface. 

And like as that immortal power doth seat 
An element of waters, to allay 
- The fiery sunbeams that on earth do beat. 
And temper by cold night the heat of day, 

So hath perfection, which begat her mind, 
Added thereto a change of fantasy. 

And left her the affections of her kind. 
Yet free from every evil but cruelty. 




But leave her praise ; speak thou of nought but 
woe ; 

Write on the tale that sorrow bids thee tell ; 
Strive to forget, and care no more to know 

Thy cares are known, by knowing those too well. 

Describe her now as she appears to thee ; 

Not as she did appear in days fordone : 
In love, those things that were no more may be, 

For fancy seldom ends where it begun. 

And as a stream by strong hand bounded in 
From nature's course where it did sometime run, 

By some small rent or loose part doth begin 
To find escape, till it a way hath won ; 

Doth then all unawares in sunder tear 

The forced bounds, and, raging, run at large 

In the ancient channels as they wonted were ; 
Such is of women's love the careful charge, — 

Held and maintained with multitude of woes ; 

Of long erections such the sudden fall ; 
One hour diverts, one instant overthrows, 

For which our lives, for which our fortune's thrall 

So many years those joys have dearly bought ; 

Of which when our fond hopes do most assure, 
All is dissolved ; our labours come to nought ; 

Nor any mark thereof there doth endure : 

No more than when small drops of rain do fall 
Upon the parched ground by heat updried ; 

No cooling moisture is perceived at all, 
Nor any show or sign of wet doth bide. 




But as the fields, clothed with leaves and flowers, 
The banks of roses smelling precious sweet, 

Have but their beauty's date and timely hours, 
And then, defaced by winter's cold and sleet, 

So far as neither fruit nor form of flower 
Stays for a witness what such branches bare. 

But as time gave, time did again devour. 
And change our rising joy to falling care : 

So of affection which our youth presented ; 
When she that from the sun reaves power and 
light, 

Did but decline her beams as discontented, 
Converting sweetest days to saddest night, 

All droops, all dies, all trodden under dust. 
The person, place, and passages forgotten ; 

The hardest steel eaten with softest rust. 

The firm and solid tree both rent and rotten. 

Those thoughts, so full of pleasure and content, 
That in our absence were affection's food, 

Are razed out and from the fancy rent ; 

In highest grace and heart's dear care that stood, 

Are cast for prey to hatred and to scorn, — 

Our dearest treasures and our heart's true joys ; 
" The tokens hung on breast and kindly worn. 
Are now elsewhere disposed or held for toys. 

And those which then our jealousy removed, 
And others for our sakes then valued dear. 

The one forgot, the rest are dear beloved. 
When all of ours doth strange or vild appear. 



Those streams seem standing puddles, which before 

We saw our beauties in, so were they clear ; 
Belphoebe's course is now observed no more ; 

That fair resemblance weareth out of date ; 

Our ocean seas are but tempestuous waves, 
And all things base, that blessed were of late 

And as a field, wherein the stubble stands 
Of harvest past, the ploughman's eye offends ; 

He tills again, or tears them up with hands. 
And throws to fire as foiled and fruitless ends, 

And takes delight another seed to sow ; 

So doth the mind root up all wonted thought, 
And scorns the care of our remaining woes ; 

The sorrows, which themselves for us have 
wrought, 

Are burnt to cinders by new kindled fires ; 

The ashes are dispersed into the air ; 
The sighs, the groans of all our past desires 

Are clean outworn, as things that never were. 

With youth is dead the hope of love's return, 
Who looks not back to hear our after-cries : 

Where he is not, he laughs at those that mourn ; 
Whence he is gone, he scorns the mind that dies. 

When he is absent, he believes no words ; 

When reason speaks, he, careless, stops his ears ; 
Whom he hath left, he never grace affords. 

But bathes his wings in our lamenting tears. 

Unlasting passion, soon outworn conceit, 
Whereon I built, and on so dureless trust ! 



My mind had wounds, I dare not say deceit, 
' Were I resolved her promise was not just. 

Sorrow was my revenge and woe my hate ; 

I powerless was to alter my desire ; 
My love is not of time or bound to date ; 

My heart's internal heat and living fire 

Would not, or could, be quenched with sudden 
showers ; 

My bound respect was not confined to days ; 
My vowed faith not set to ended hours ; > 
I love the bearing and not bearing sprays 

Which now to others do their sweetness send ; 
The incarnate, snow-driven white, and purest 
azure, ^ 

Who from high heaven doth on their fields descend. 
Filling their barns with grain, and towers with 
treasure. 

Erring or never erring, such is love 

As, while it lasteth, scorns the account of those 
Seeking but self-contentment to improve. 

And hides, if any be, his inward woes, 

And will not know, while he knows his own passion, 
The often and unjust perseverance 
" In deeds of love and state, and every action 

From that first day and yearof their joy's entrance. 

But I, unblessed and ill-born creature, 

That did embrace the dust her body bearing, 

That loved her, both by fancy and by nature. 
That drew, even with the milk in my first sucking, 




Affection from the parent's breast that bare me, 
Have found her as a stranger so severe, 

Improving my mishap in each degree ; 

But love was gone : so would I my life were ! 

A queen she was to me, — no more Belphoebe ; 

A lion then, — no more a milk-white dove ; 
A prisoner in her breast I could not be ; — 

She did untie the gentle chains of love. 

Love was no more the love of hiding 

All trespass and mischance for her own glory : 
It had been such ; it was still for the elect ; 

But I must be the example in love's story ; 
This was of all forepast the sad effect. 

But thou, my weary soul and heav^- thought, 
Made by her love a burthen to my being, 

Dost know my error never was forethought, 
Or ever could proceed from sense of loving. 

Of other cause if then it had proceeding, 

I leave the excuse, .sith judgment hath been 
given ; 

The limbs divided, sundered, and ableeding. 
Cannot complain the sentence was uneven. 

This did that nature's wonder, virtue's choice, 
The only paragon of time's begetting. 

Divine in words, angelical in voice. 

That spring of joys, that flower of love's own 
setting, 




The idea remaining of those golden ages, 

That beauty, braving heavens and earth em- 
balming, 

Which after worthless worlds but play on stages. 
Such didst thou her long since describe, yet 
sighing 

That thy unable spirit could not find aught. 
In heaven's beauties or in earth's delight, 

For likeness fit to satisfy thy thought : 

But what hath it availed thee so to write ? 

She cares not for thy praise, who knows not theirs ; 

It's now an idle labour, and a tale 
Told out of time, that dulls the hearer's ears ; 

A merchandize whereof there is no sale. 

Leave them, or lay them up with thy despairs ! 

She hath resolved, and judged thee long ago. 
Thy lines are now a murmuring to her ears. 

Like to a falling stream, which, passing slow. 

Is wont to nourish sleep and quietness ; 

So shall thy painful labours be perused. 
And draw on rest, which sometime had regard ; 

But those her cares thy errors have excused. 

Thy days fordone have had their day's reward ; 

So her hard heart, so her estranged mind. 
In which above the heavens I once reposed ; 

So to thy error have her ears inclined. 

And have forgotten all thy past deserving. 
Holding in mind but only thine offence ; 

And only now afiecteth thy depraving. 

And thinks all vain that pleadeth thy defence. 



Yet greater fancy beauty never bred ; 

A more desire the heart-blood never nourished ; 
Her sweetness an affection never fed, 

Which more in any age hath ever flourished. 

The mind and virtue never have begotten 

A firmer love, since love on earth had power ; 

A love obscured, but cannot be forgotten ; 

Too great and strong for time's jaws to devour ; 

Containing such a faith as ages wound not. 
Care, wakeful ever of her good estate. 

Fear, dreading loss, which sighs and joys not, 
A memory of the joys her grace begat ; 

A lasting gratefulness for those comforts past. 
Of which the cordial sweetness cannot die ; 

These thoughts, knit up by faith, shall ever last ; 
These time assays, but never can untie, 

Whose life once lived in her pearl-like breast. 

Whose joys were drawn but from her happiness. 
Whose hearts high pleasure, and whose mind's 
true rest. 

Proceeded from her fortune's blessedness ; 

Who was intentive, wakeful, and dismayed 
In fears, in dreams, in feverous jealousy, 

Who long in silence served, and obeyed 
With secret heart and hidden loyalty, 

Which never change to sad adversity. 
Which never age, or nature's overthrow, 

Which never sickness or deformity, 

Which never wasting care or wearing woe. 

If subject unto these she could have been, — 




Which never words or wits malicious. 

Which never honour's bait, or world s fame, 

Achieved by attempts adventurous, 

Or aught beneath the sun or heavens frame 

Can so dissolve, dissever, or destroy 

The essential love of no frail parts compounded, 
Though of the same now buried be the joy. 

The -hope, the comfort, and the sweetness ended, 

But that the thoughts and memories of thfese 
Work a relapse of passion, and remain 

Of mv sad heart the sorrow-suckmg bees ; _ 
The wrongs received, the frowns persuade in vain. 

And though these medicines work desire to end. 
And are in others the true cure of liking, 

The salves that heal love's wounds, and do amend 
Consuming woe, and slake our hearty sighing, 

They work not so in thy mind's long decease ; 

External fancy time alone recureth: 
All whose effects do wear away with ease 

Love of delight, while such delight endureth ; 
Stays by the pleasure, but no longer stays .... 

But in my mind so is her love inclosed. 
And is thereof not only the best part, 

But into it the essence is disposed 

Oh love ! (the more my woe) to it thou art 

Even as the moisture in each plant that grows ; 

Even as the sun unto the frozen ground ; 
Even as the sweetness to the incarnate rose ; 

Even as the centre in each perfect round: 




As water to the fish, to men as air, 
As heat to fire, as light unto the sun ; 

Oh love ! it is but vain to say thou were ; 
Ages and times cannot thy power outrun. 

Thou art the soul of that unhappy mind 

Which, being by nature made an idle thought, 

Began even then to take immortal kind, 

When first her virtues in thy spirits wrought. 

From thee therefore that mover cannot move, 
Because it is become thy cause of being ; 

Whatever error may obscure that love, 
Whatever frail effect in mortal living. 

Whatever passion from distempered heart. 
What absence, time, or injuries effect. 

What faithless friends or deep dissembled art 
Present to feed her most unkind suspect. 

Yet as the air in deep caves underground 

Is strongly drawn when violent heat hath vent, 

Great clefts therein, till moisture do abound, 
And then the same, imprisoned and uppent. 

Breaks out in earthquakes tearing all asunder ; 

So, in the centre of my cloven heart — 
My heart, to whom her beauties were such wonder — 

Lies the sharp poisoned head of that love's dart 

Which, till all break and all dissolve to dust. 
Thence drawn it cannot be, or therein known : 

There, mixed with my heart-blood, the fretting rust 
The better part hath eaten and outgrown. 




But what of those or these ? or what of ought 
Of that which was, or that which is, to treat ? 

What I possess is but the same I sought ; 
My love was false, my labours were deceit. 

Nor less than such they are esteemed to be ; 

A fraud bought at the price of many woes ; 
A guile, whereof the profits unto me — 

Could it be thought premeditate for those ? 

Witness those withered leaves left on the tree, 
The sorrow-worn face, the pensive mind ; 

The external shews what may the internal be : 
Cold care hath bitten both the root and rind. 

But stay, my thoughts, make end : give fortune way : 
Harsh is the voice of woe and sorrow's sound : 

Complaints cure not, and tears do but allay 
Griefs for a time, which after more abound. 

To seek for moisture in the Arabian sand 

Is but a loss of labour and of rest : 
The links which time did break of hearty bands 

Words cannot knit, or wailings make anew. 

Seek not the sun in clouds when it is set. . . . 
On highest mountains, where those cedars grew, 

Against whose banks the troubled ocean beat, 

And were the marks to find thy hoped port, 
Into a soil far off themselves remove. 

On Sestus' shore, Leander's late resort, 
Hero hath left no lamp to guide her love. 

Thou lookest for light in vain, and storms arise ; 
She sleeps thy death, that erst thy danger sighed; 



To God I leave it, who first gave it me, 
And I her gave, and she returned again, 

As it was hers ; so let His mercies be 
Of my last comforts the essential mean. 

But be it so or not, the effects are past; 

Her love hath end ; my woe must ever last. 


My days' delights, my spring-time joys fordone, 
Which in the dawn and rising sun of youth 

Had their creation, and were first begun. 

Do in the evening and the winter sad 
Present my mind, which takes my time's account, 

The grief remaining of the joy it had. 

My times that then ran o'er themselves in these, 
And now run out in other's happiness, 

Bring unto those new joys and new-born days. 
So could she not if she were not the sun. 

Which sees the birth and burial of all else. 
And holds that power with which she first begun. 

Leaving each withered body to be torn 
By fortune, and by times tempestuous. 

Which, by her virtue, once fair fruit have born ; 

Knowing she can renew, and can create 
Green from the ground, and flowers even out of stone . 
By virtue lasting over time and date, 

Leaving us only woe, which, like the moss. 
Having compassion of unburied bones. 
Cleaves to mischance, and unrepaired loss. 
